---
layout: post
title: OSGi and IKEA
summary: Modular software, modular furniture.
tags: java osgi eclipse
date: '05/11/2011 11:00'
---

Mario Fusco wrote a "thought-provoking tweet":https://twitter.com/#!/mariofusco/status/68209314178928640 this morning:

bq. Ikea / furnishing = OSGi / software : They allow to have very modular things, but trying to put them together generally drives you crazy

This is an interesting analogy, but I obviously take issue with the implied criticism of OSGi. So let's break it down.

The first thing to say is that I actually find IKEA furniture quite easy to build, and I doubt I am alone in this. Especially once you have built a few, you find there are common patterns... similar tools, similar kinds of connectors and so on. The instructions are so simple that they don't even need any text, and in many cases you can still complete the build even if you've lost the intructions.

The main sources of frustration are errors: missing parts, or poorly machined connectors that don't fit they way they should. Fortunately these problems are rare -- when a part IS missing, it's nearly always because I have lost it myself.

Is there an alternative to this kind of modular construction? Of course. The previous generation of manufactured furniture consisted of completely whole, inflexible objects, produced in huge quantities. A desk, for example, was available in specific dimensions and with a specific number of drawers. If that desk didn't fit the corner where you wanted to put it, then you had two choices: hope somebody else __did__ sell a desk of the right size... or move house.

Before mass production, furniture was assembled by craftsmen. It was gorgeous, high quality, fit precisely to your requirements... and cost literally thousands of times more than an equivalent IKEA product.

Today most software is produced according to one of these two models. They are packaged COTS software and bespoke in-house applications, respectively. There is nothing wrong with either approach: if your requirements are conventional then a COTS solution is best; if your requirements are unique (and you have deep pockets) then building bespoke is the way to go. But there is a huge gulf between these models, and if your requirements fall somewhere between the two then you face either making do with software that isn't quite what you need, or spending a fortune building your own thing from scratch.

There has to be a better way... an IKEA way... and that's exactly what OSGi is. It empowers the end customer to assemble modules into a finished article that meets their needs, going way beyond the limited customisation abilities of COTS products. At the same time it offers a cost model closer to that of mass production.

Can OSGi modules drive you crazy when you try to put them together? Yes that happens, and for the same reasons: something is missing, or something is bad quality. IKEA has excellent quality controls over the parts that it sells... third party software authors, well, not so much.

[Incidentally where does open source fit into this analogy? In my opionion, open source libraries are usually neither comprehensive nor robust enough to correspond to a "component" or "module" in the IKEA sense. I believe they are more like the raw materials: the laminated MDF boards, the screws and connectors and clippy things. These are vital productivity enhancers for the craftsmen who design the components, but they are not components themselves that can be assembled and deployed by end users.]